# RC-NVM: Enabling Symmetric Row and Column Memory Accesses for In-Memory Databases
[Reference](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8327034)

## What is the problem the paper is trying to solve?
DRAM memory systems are suitable for row-based actions like operation from OLTP system, but OLAP systems because of the scanning operation they perform and their strided accesses can result in significant performance degradation.

## What are the key ideas of the paper? Key insights?
Finding that crossbar-based non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies, such as 3D XPoint, RRAM, and PCM, are promissing alternatives to support both row-oriented and column-oriented accesses with much lower area overhead, the authors design Row-Column-NVM (RC-NVM) that leverages the layout symmetry of crossbar-based NVM to enable fexible and efficient row and column accesses for IMDBs.

## The solution

## Strenghts

## Weaknesses

## Comment

## New Ideas?

---
## For learning
- Increaing DRAM capacity => development of In-Memory DataBases (IMDB)
- The integration of OLTP (On-Line Transactional Processing) and OLAP (On-Line Analytical Processing) systems is becoming a general trend.
- Conventional DRAM-based main memory is optimized for **row-oriented** accesses generated by OLTP workloads in row-based databases. OLAP queries scanning on specified columns cause so-called strided accesses and resul in poor memory performance. Since memory access latency dominates in IMDB processing time, it can degrade overall performance significantly.
- An in-memory database (IMDB) is a database system that keeps a significant part of data in main memory to achieve hgih query performance because nowadays disk-based databases fail to satisfy the needs of unltra-low latency services and real-time data analytics, and also DRAM technology provides high capacity with fair price.
- Examples of well-konwn IMDB research projects
  - MonetDB
  - H-Store/VoltDB
  - HyPer
  - Hyrise
-  Examples of commercial IMDBs
   -  Oracle TimesTen
   -  IBM SolidDB
   -  Microsoft Hekaton
   -  SAP HANA
- Database Workloads categorized in
  - OLTP: on-Line Transactional Processing => few access to several rows at a time
  - OLAP: on-Line Analytical Processing => bulk sequential scans spanning a few columns of the database, such as computing aggregate values of specific columns
- These two workloads are usually served by two different types of database systems:
  - Transactional Processing systems
  - Data Warehouse Systems
  - **Drawback of this approach**: 
    - At least two copies of data are resident in memory
    - Synchronization between two versions of data leads to the slow response time in analytics over real-time changing data
- In a nutshell, the integration of OLTP and OLAP database systems by means of in-memory technology has become a prevailing trend.
- Conventionally, data in physical main memory is stored with a row based layout is friendly to row-oriented access pattern in OLTP. However, for OLAP with column-oriented access patterns, it results in intensive so-called strided memory accesses that degrade memory efficiency due to poor row buffer and cache utilization.
- How to optimize memory architecture to facilitate both row-oriented and column-oriented data accesses has become a key instrunment in improving its performance.
- 